954 admiral strategy (#1068)
pharmaverse/admiral: README.md

## Purpose

To provide an open source, modularized toolbox that enables the pharmaceutical programming community
to develop ADaM datasets in R.

## Installation

The package is available from CRAN and can be installed by running `install.packages("admiral")`.

To install the latest development version of the package directly from GitHub use the following code:

```r
if (!requireNamespace("remotes", quietly = TRUE)) {
  install.packages("remotes")
}
remotes::install_github("pharmaverse/admiral", ref = "devel")
```

## Main Goal

> Provide data scientists with an open source, modularized toolbox with which to create ADaM datasets

Reviewer: Can we just say, Provide users or developers?

Author: agree - happy to update these mentions all to just say "users"

in R from. _As opposed to a “run 1 line and an ADaM appears” black-box solution or an attempt to
automate ADaM._

One of the key aspects of `{admiral}` is its development by the users for the users.

> It gives an entry point for all data scientists to collaborate, co-create and contribute to a

Reviewer: Feel like our audience is statistical programmers, but I guess the data scientists are taking over the world!  Could we make it less specific to a job role?

harmonised approach of developing ADaMs in R across the pharmaceutical industry.

## Scope

To set expectations: It is not our target that `{admiral}` will ever provide all possible solutions
for all ADaM datasets outside of study specific needs. It depends on the user's collaboration

> and contribution to help grow over time to a toolkit library that is robust, easy to use and

Reviewer: Could the phrase toolkit library be linked out to the pharmaverse website?

Author: i think we meant here more that admiral itself is a library of code, rather than the pharmaverse which curates this and other such packages. i'll update here so clearer and will use the wording "asset library" to match the "al" of admiral

has an across-industry focus. We do not see a coverage of 100% of all ADaM derivations as ever
achievable - ADaM is endless.

We will provide:
* A toolbox of re-usable functions and utilities to create ADaM datasets using R scripts in a
modular manner (an "opinionated" design strategy)
* Pharmaceutical communities and companies are encouraged to contribute to `{admiral}` following
the provided programming strategy and modular approach
* Functions that are comprehensively documented and tested, including example calls - these are
all listed in the [Reference section](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/reference/index.html)
* Vignettes on how to create ADSL, BDS and OCCUR datasets, including example scripts

> * Vignettes for ADaM dataset specific functionality (i.e. dictionary coding, date imputation,

Reviewer: Is it possible to link these out  to the vignettes?  If folks come to the github and scroll down to the REadme it would be a good chance to send them to the part of the website with user friendly vignettes.  The reference section makes my eyes hut

Reviewer 2: you mean to have them linked to the example scripts and vignettes directly from the readme?

Reviewer: yes

SMQs ...)

## Types of Packages
There will be 3 foreseeable types of `{admiral}` packages:
* Core package - one package containing all core functions required to create ADaMs,
usable by any company (i.e. general derivations, utility functions and checks for ADSL, OCCDS and BDS)

> * TA (Therapeutic Area) package extensions - one package per disease area with functions that are

Author: agree

> specific to algorithms and requirements for that particular TA (e.g. `{admiralonco}`)

Reviewer: What about linking to admiralonco github?

Author: i wouldn't personally just yet as the site would be the main thing useful to link to (the github repo is easily findable in pharmaverse org anyway) and the site is not quite ready yet for main stream attention. in future i can see us having something in the readme for a list of all such package extensions with each site link though

Reviewer: makes sense thanks!

Reviewer 2: I close this for now.

* Company package extensions - specific needs and plug-ins for the company, such as access to metadata
(e.g. `{admiralroche}` or `{admiralgsk}`)

## Admiral Manifesto
For `{admiral}` and all extension packages, we prioritise providing our users with a **simple to adopt** toolkit
that enables them to produce **readable** and **easily constructible** ADaM programs. The following explains
our philosophy, which we try to adhere to across the `{admiral}` family of packages.

> There isn’t always a clear single, straight forward rule but there are guiding principles we adhere to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There isn’t always a clear single, straightforward rule, but there are guiding principles we adhere to for admiral.
```

This manifesto helps show the considerations of our developers when making decisions.

We have four priority design principles to achieve the main goal as follows:

> 

Reviewer: Could the four design principles be put at the top?  Maybe bulleted after main goal as follows: 

* Usability
* Simplicity
* Findability 
* Readability

Author: Robin had something similar in his draft, but i actually felt when it was down on the homepage that it reads better without repeating these so i took that out. Let's see what others think, but i was conscious of not putting too many new sections on the homepage for fear of scaring people off from actually reading it all

Reviewer 2: @bms63 I would be fine as is right now. Is it ok to close this from your end?

_**Usability**_

All `{admiral}` functions should be easy to use. 

> * Our documentation is an absolute priority. Each function reference page should cover the purpose,

Reviewer: Remove the Our?  Just Documentation....

Author: agree

descriptions of each argument with permitted values, the expected input and output, with clear real-life
examples - so that users don’t need to dig through code to find answers.
* Vignettes that complement the functional documentation to help users see how best the functions can be

> applied to achieve customary ADaM requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
applied to achieve ADaM requirements.
```

> * Vignettes then complement the functional documentation to help users see how best they can be applied to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Vignettes thatcomplement the functional documentation to help users see how best the functions can be applied to
```

Author: agree

> * Functions should be written and structured in a way that users are able to read, re-use or extend them

Reviewer: I think this should be the first point

Reviewer 2: Do you mean the last bullet (85/86)?

for study specific purposes if needed (see Readability below).

> 

Reviewer 3: Should we add some verbiage around how we prioritize Usability over Simplicity - while our goal is to make the functions easy to use, we don't want to make it so simple that nobody will actually use it.  There may be cases where adding a parameter or two will lead to much greater use of the function by end users.  So we are always debating that right balance, but in the end Usability takes priority over Simplicity.

Author: @upadhyor any specific text you would add or change for this point? i'm finding it difficult to see where to update. my view is the 2 kind of go hand in hand. for me the sentence below that says _"if you as a user pick up a function with >10 different arguments then chances are it is going to be difficult to understand if this function could be applied for your specific need"_ gives the general idea we're getting at. basically if there is a common need for users then we can add things to admiral functions but not at the cost of making them so complex that nobody will understand them. also we have this line in the programming strategy which i think speaks to your point about not over-simplifying: _"If something needed for ADaM could be achieved simply via an existing tidyverse function, then we do not wrap this into an admiral function, as that would add an unnecessary extra layer for users."_

_**Simplicity**_

> Each function has a clear purpose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All {admiral} functions have a clear purpose.
```

> * We try not to ever design single functions that could achieve numerous very different derivations, as for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We try not to ever design single functions that could achieve numerous very different derivations. For
```

> * We try not to ever design single functions that could achieve numerous very different derivations, as for

Reviewer: I want to have a deeper read of this section as I find it confusing but don't have time yet to make suggestions.  I get gist of it and agree with it just got confused...I might be a bit slow sorry

Author: please do Ben - this was probably one of the hardest section to put into words, BUT that being said if we can't describe our guidance around "simplicity" in a simple way then we've clearly missed the point! :D

Author: i personally think we need this, as in the SAS macro based tools we've designed in the past for similar pieces they all are usable but often require intense trainings and people have to learn them over many years. often they would be fine for the very standard pieces but when you needed to go non-standard they would be difficult to debug and users would call them a "black-box". whereas for admiral to be successful industry-wide in the open source it has to be simple to pick up and very transparent. that's why so many of the admiral discussions often balance out the developer perspective (how to make the codebase most efficient and maintainable) vs the user perspective, and we often end up siding on what would the user prefer.

Reviewer 2: @bms63 just checking, would you like to change it? Any suggestion?

example if you as a user pick up a function with >10 different arguments then chances are it is going to be
difficult to understand if this function could be applied for your specific need. The intention is that
arguments/parameters can influence how the output of a function is calculated, but not change the purpose of
the function.

> * On the other hand, we do try to combine similar tasks and algorithms into one function to reduce the amount
> of repetitive, similar functionality (e.g. one study day calculation rather than a function per variable).
> Importantly here though, functions cannot be too general and trying to fulfil multiple, complex purposes.
> Similarly, functions should not allow expressions as arguments that are used as code snippets in function calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We try to combine similar tasks and algorithms into one function to reduce the amount of repetitiveness and/or group together similar functionality (e.g. one study day calculation rather than a function per variable).
* We strive to design functions that are not too general and trying to fulfil multiple, complex purposes.
* Functions should not allow expressions as arguments that are used as code snippets in function calls.
```

Reviewer: ...this is hard.  I feel like declarative sentences are really important for a manifesto.  Some of these statements seem too wordy.

Reviewer 2: I see your point. Let me go through it once more.

Reviewer 2: @bms63 would that be better?

* We recommend to avoid copy and paste of complex computational algorithms or repetitive code like checks
and advise to wrap them into a function. However we would also like to avoid multi-layered functional nesting,
so this needs to be considered carefully to keep the nesting of 3-4 functions an exception rather than the rule.

_**Findability**_

In a growing codebase, across a family of packages, we make every effort to make our functions easily findable.

> * We use consistent naming conventions across all our functions, and provide vignettes and ADaM templates that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In a growing codebase, across a family of packages, we make every effort to make our functions easily findable.
* We use consistent naming conventions across all our functions, and provide vignettes and ADaM templates that
```

help users to get started and build familiarity. Each `{admiral}` family package website is searchable.
* We avoid repetitive functions that will do similar tasks (as explained above with study day example).

> * Each package extension is kept focused on the specific scope, i.e. any common need that could be raised up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Each package extension is kept focused on the specific scope, e.g. features that can enabled across extension packages will be brought to the core {admiral} package. 
```

Author: i'll go with... e.g. features that are relevant across multiple extension packages will be moved to the core `{admiral}` package.

to the core package will be.

_**Readability**_

> We have a very prescriptive Programming Strategy guide that all our developers and contributors must follow,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a very prescriptive Programming Strategy guide(link?) that all our developers and contributors must follow,
```

Author: agree, will add link

> We have a very prescriptive [Programming Strategy](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/articles/programming_strategy.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{All  {admiral} functions follow the [Programming Strategy](https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/articles/programming_strategy.html)
```

Reviewer: The other part can go as a separate bullet point

so that all our code has a high degree of consistency and readability.

> * We mandate use of tidyverse (e.g. dplyr) over similar functionality existing in base R.

Reviewer: Do we mandate this?  I thought we mandate tidyverse style guide?  I don't see this in the Programming Strategy Guide

Author: @thomas-neitmann i remember you asked for this. should i add to programming strategy too?

Reviewer 2: @bms63 do you think it needs a broader discussion? I think this is basically the direction we going, it just needs to be added to the programming strategy.

Reviewer: I'm fine with that we should just state that somewhere.  As this is the first time I've seen this in writing.

Reviewer 2: I added it to the programming strategy too.

> * For the sections of any code that perform the actual derivation (e.g. besides assertions or basic utilities),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For sections of code that perform the actual derivations (e.g. besides assertions or basic utilities),
```

we try to limit nesting of too many dependencies or functions.

> * Modularity is a focus - we don’t try to achieve too many steps in one, and all code has to be well commented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Modularity is a focus - we don’t try to achieve too many steps in one.
* All code has to be well commented.
```

> * We recognise that a user or a HA reviewer may have the wish to delve into the codebase (especially given this

Reviewer: what is HA?

Author: Health Authority - included in full now

* Vignettes on how to create ADSL, BDS and OCCUR datasets, including example scripts
* Vignettes for ADaM dataset specific functionality (i.e. dictionary coding, date imputation,
SMQs ...)

## Types of Packages
There will be 3 foreseeable types of `{admiral}` packages:
* Core package - one package containing all core functions required to create ADaMs,
usable by any company (i.e. general derivations, utility functions and checks for ADSL, OCCDS and BDS)
* TA (Therapeutic Area) package extensions - one package per TA with functions that are
specific to algorithms and requirements for that particular TA (e.g. `{admiralonco}`)
* Company package extensions - specific needs and plug-ins for the company, such as access to metadata
(e.g. `{admiralroche}` or `{admiralgsk}`)

## Admiral Manifesto
For `{admiral}` and all extension packages, we prioritise providing our users with a **simple to adopt** toolkit
that enables them to produce **readable** and **easily constructible** ADaM programs. The following explains
our philosophy, which we try to adhere to across the `{admiral}` family of packages.

> There isn’t always a clear single, straightforward rule, but there are guiding principles we adhere to for admiral.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There isn’t always a clear single, straightforward rule, but there are guiding principles we adhere to for `{admiral}`.
```
